---
tags: todo
---

## traditional methods

- hot water with chemicals

## problems with traditional methods

- large energy and chemicals consumptions

## studies 

Many studies evaluated the use of ozonated water and gas to clean and sanitize equipment and different surfaces in dairy locations [55], (Table 3).

- Greene et al. [89] studied the effect of ozonated deionized water against psychrophilic contaminating microflora (Pseudomonas fluorescens and Alcaligenes faecalis) on stainless steel plates, showing that a 10-min exposure with a concentration of 0.5 ppm decreased the microbial growth by more than 4 log10. For the experimentation, stainless steel plates were incubated in UHT pasteurized milk and inoculated with pure cultures of Pseudomonas fluorescens (ATCC 949) or Alcaligenes faecalis (ATCC 337). Since these are metal surfaces, the corrosive power of ozone must always be considered. The use of ozonated water is recommended, instead of hot water and chlorine, when the surfaces of the milk processing equipment are not damaged. Recently, the potential of disinfection effectiveness of single and synergistic ozone (10 ppm for 15 min) and UVC (1 cm or 15.56 mW cm􀀀2 for 15 min) treatment for the sterilization of bacteria and fungi (Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Candida albicans, and Aspergillus fumigatus) was studied on different material surfaces (stainless steel, polymethyl methacrylate, copper, surgical facemask, denim, and a fabric) [90].
- In the work of Dosti et al. [91], fresh 24-h bacterial cultures were treated with ozone (0.6 ppm for 1 min and 10 min), chlorine (100 ppm for 2 min), or heat (77  1 C for 5 min), showing its effectiveness against food spoilage microorganism in synthetic broth. The bacterial biofilm on the metal coupons was significantly reduced by ozone and chlorine, but with no significant difference between ozone and chlorine, except for P. putida (ozone was more effective than chlorine).
- Greene et al. [47] observed that 0.4–0.5 ppm of ozone, pulsed into water at 21–23 C for 20 min per day over a 7-day period, caused a certain degree of weight loss of all materials tested (i.e., aluminum, copper, stainless steel, and carbon steel), but only weight loss for carbon steel was significant. Therefore, special attention is required when the treatment is used for dairy chilling water systems with copper or carbon steel parts.
- Megahed et al. [92,93] studied the effect of gaseous-ozone and aqueous-ozone (from 1 to 10 ppm) in commonly used devices of the dairy industry (plastic, nylon, rubber, and wood) contaminated by cattle manure-based pathogens. It was observed that aqueousozone treatment at a concentration of 4 ppm or greater reduced bacterial load below detectable limits within 2 min of exposure predominantly on the plastic surface, while other surfaces were largely decontaminated after 4 min of treatment. Gaseous O3 cannot be an alternative to aqueous O3 in reducing the manure-based pathogens to a safe level, particularly in complex environments. The results obtained are in line with different previous studies [94].

- It is important to consider the contamination of surfaces by spoilage bacteria, like Pseudomonas spp. and pathogenic bacteria, like Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella spp., that lead to recurrent food contamination, with problems related to the shelf life and safety of dairy products.
- Biofilm development in food processing facilities is prevented by using common chemical sanitizers, but their use has some disadvantages, such as damaging environmental impacts and harmful consequences for human health [52]. The use of ozone could be a promising technique to prevent spoilage or pathogenic bacteria contamination [22].
- Shelobolina et al. [95] studied the effect of dissolved ozone (5 ppm for 20 min) on Pseudomonas biofilm on various surfaces, and they observed that ozone can be effective. Biofilms on plastic materials showed inactivation effects, such as for glass, while biofilms grown on ceramics were more difficult to inactivate. Therefore, it is important to use non-porous materials in industrial and clinical settings. It has also been demonstrated that ozone can have an antimicrobial effect in association with other technologies: for example, ozone water and hydrogen peroxide solution were effective on P. fluorescens biofilm.
- A sequential treatment with 1.0 and 1.7 mg L􀀀1 of ozone, followed by 0.8 and 1.1% of hydrogen peroxide, showed synergistic disinfection effects [96].
- In a study of a cheese production plant, the gaseous ozonation of 2 ppm was provided during a weekend for 15 min (first treatment) and for 120 min (second treatment), when staff were not present. Testing for L. monocytogenes was carried out for a total of 360 environmental samples, over a period of 12 months, in 15 areas before and 15 areas after ozonation: there was a significant reduction in L. monocytogenes isolations from 15.0% in pre-zoning samples to 1.67% in post-ozonation samples in all areas, to include the ozonation regime in the hygiene-health program. No negative effects of ozonation treatment were noted on the surfaces and equipment [97].
- Instead, Shao et al. [98] studied the effect of ozone water on mature S. aureus and Salmonella spp. biofilm on stainless steel surfaces, using acidic electrolyzed water, ozone water, or ultrasound (40 kHz) alone, and combinations of ultrasound and disinfectants. They detected less than 0.8 Log CFU (colony-forming units) cm􀀀2 of cells reduction in biofilm exposed to ozonized water (16 mg L􀀀1) for 20 min. Only in a few studies was the efficacy of ozone explored against biofilms formed by bacteria belonging to the Salmonella genus [99].
- Indoor air in the dairy industry constitutes a source or a vehicle of microbial contamination, causing food safety and product shelf-life problems. Masotti et al. [100] monitored the air microbial load in the dairy plant and evaluated the impact of air disinfection through ozonation or chemical aerosolization by hydrogen peroxide. Ozonated air had a constant flow rate of 40 L min􀀀1, and it generated 1.5 g ozone per hour (11–12 p.m. and 1–3 a.m. from Friday to Sunday). Hydrogen peroxide aerosolization was realized producing particles in the range of 5–15 m at a concentration of 5–15% for 16 and 20 min. Both techniques were effective against airborne microorganisms.

[ tables ]